.TH ESP-MONITOR 1 "2026-07-10" "esp-monitor 0.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
esp-monitor \- serial monitor and MCP server for ESP8266/ESP32 dev boards
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B esp-monitor
.I COMMAND
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B esp-monitor
is a CLI and MCP server for ESP8266/ESP32 dev boards connected over USB
serial. It can reset/power-cycle a board by toggling the RTS/DTR lines
(the same technique tools like
.BR esptool.py (1)
use), stream its serial console, and \(em via the
.B mcp
subcommand \(em let an LLM agent do the same thing programmatically: reset
the board, read buffered log history, and manage file logging, all over
MCP's stdio transport.
.PP
No system libraries are required to build or run
.BR esp-monitor :
.I serialport
is built with
.B default-features = false
(no
.I libudev
needed, since this tool never enumerates ports; you pass
.B \-\-port
explicitly).
.PP
On Linux, your user needs access to the serial device, typically via the
.I dialout
group:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo usermod \-aG dialout $USER
.fi
.RE
.PP
(log out/in, or run
.BR "newgrp dialout" ,
for it to take effect)
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B console
Reset the board (unless
.BR \-\-no\-reboot )
and stream its serial console.
.TP
.B on
Alias for
.BR console .
.TP
.B reset
Alias for
.BR console .
.TP
.B off
Hold the board in reset/power-off (RTS asserted, DTR clear) and exit.
.TP
.B watch
Reset the board (unless
.BR \-\-no\-reboot ),
stream its console, and exit with a status code matching a pass/fail
pattern match \(em for CI or on-device test runners that need a plain
process exit code instead of a human watching logs.
.TP
.B mcp
Start the MCP server on the stdio transport.
.SH OPTIONS
Options common to
.BR console ", " on ", " reset ", " off ", " watch ", and " mcp :
.TP
.BI \-\-port " PORT"
Serial device path.
Default:
.IR /dev/ttyUSB0 .
.TP
.BI \-\-baud " RATE"
Serial baud rate.
Default:
.IR 115200 .
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-vv ", " \-vvv
Increase log verbosity (info, debug, trace respectively). Diagnostics are
always written to stderr; for the
.B mcp
subcommand stdout is reserved for the JSON-RPC transport.
.PP
Additional options for
.BR console ", " on ", " reset ", " watch ", and " mcp
(reset tuning):
.TP
.BI \-\-reset\-pulse\-ms " MS"
Width of the reset pulse.
Default:
.IR 100 .
.TP
.BI \-\-reset\-timeout\-ms " MS"
How long to wait for the board to respond to a reset attempt.
Default:
.IR 2000 .
.TP
.BI \-\-reset\-retries " N"
Number of reset pulses to attempt before giving up.
Default:
.IR 5 .
.PP
Additional options for
.BR console ", " on ", and " reset
only:
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-path " FILE"
Persist the session to a file.
A companion
.I *.stats.*
file captures any
.RI ( "/* ... */" )-delimited
system-stat packets separately.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-time " SECS"
Stop streaming after this many seconds.
Default:
.RI ( \-1 ,
run until Ctrl-C).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-console
Do not print board output to stdout. Useful together with
.B \-\-log\-path
for silent capture.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-reboot
Skip the reset before streaming.
.PP
Additional options for
.B watch
only:
.TP
.BI \-\-pass\-pattern " REGEX"
Exit 0 the moment a streamed line matches this regex.
.TP
.BI \-\-fail\-pattern " REGEX"
Exit 1 the moment a streamed line matches this regex.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " SECS"
Exit 2 if neither pattern matches within this many seconds.
Default:
.IR 30 .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-console
Do not print board output to stdout while watching.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-reboot
Skip the reset before watching.
.PP
Additional options for
.B mcp
only:
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-path " FILE"
Optionally start file logging immediately when the server connects.
.TP
.BI \-\-ring\-buffer\-lines " N"
Number of log lines retained in the in-memory ring buffer.
Default:
.IR 2000 .
.TP
.BI \-\-ring\-buffer\-bytes " N"
Byte budget for the in-memory ring buffer.
Default:
.IR 2097152
(2 MiB).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Reset the board and stream its console:
.B esp-monitor console \-\-port /dev/ttyUSB0
.TP
Attach without resetting:
.B esp-monitor console \-\-port /dev/ttyUSB0 \-\-no\-reboot
.TP
Hold the board in power-off:
.B esp-monitor off \-\-port /dev/ttyUSB0
.TP
Start the MCP server for an agent to drive:
.B esp-monitor mcp \-\-port /dev/ttyUSB0
.TP
Reset, watch for on-device test results, and exit with a matching status:
.B esp-monitor watch \-\-port /dev/ttyUSB0 \-\-pass\-pattern 'test result: ok' \-\-fail\-pattern 'test result: FAILED' \-\-timeout 30
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B esp-monitor
exits with status 0 on success, non-zero on error (e.g. the port could not
be opened, or the board never confirmed a reset).
.PP
For
.B watch
specifically: 0 if
.B \-\-pass\-pattern
matched, 1 if
.B \-\-fail\-pattern
matched, 2 if
.B \-\-timeout
elapsed with no match.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR esptool.py (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Brandon Arrendondo <brandon.arrendondo@bissell.com>
